---
layout: blog
title: Encouraging Innovation in the Workplace
date: 2020-06-05T21:08:50.441Z
---
## The Situation
I have the good fortune of working with some talented software developers at my current job. People with a healthy curiosity, good ideas, and the skill to act on them. People who care about the work that they do, and are dedicated to the craft of software development.

Our company also has a provision for "innovation time", which we call "Tinker Time". It's based off the concept of "[20% time](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/20%25_Project)", with a few rules:
- Tinker Time grants each member of the engineering team (both dev and QA) 2 days a month to research or experiment with any software-related topic, which doesn't necessarily have to be related to anything in our current tech stack. The 2 days can be banked for a month, so if someone chooses they can take 4 days every other month.
- Even if one's Tinker Time doesn't yield an artifact, a presentation must be given to the whole engineering team (about 20 people at the time of writing this) sometime afterwards. It doesn't have to be long, typically between 15 and 30 minutes. A PowerPoint is required if there's nothing to demo.
- Tinker Time can be used to pay down tech debt. If it's used to improve an existing product, then no presentation is required. Anything that is worked on must undergo the usual testing and deployment process in order to make it into production.


So, given the existence of both of these things, we should have a good handle on innovation, right? Well...  
  

## The Problem
Nobody takes Tinker Time. Tinker Time as a concept is known to our project management team. And, despite the recent changes in leadership, nobody has explicitly _killed_ the policy. In fact, when I brought the existence of it to their attention just a few weeks ago, they encouraged us to take it. But nobody does. Even though the policy is documented and universally understood, Tinker Time isn't accounted for in any of our timelines. One has to declare their PTO two weeks in advance so that it can be accounted for in the next Sprint; Tinker Time has no such rule. Nobody wants to be the one who left their team hanging for 2 to 4 days to mess with Blazor, or to fix some poor styling on in internal tool. Thus, we find ourselves in a Prisoner's Dilemma. If everyone took Tinker Time, then innovation and a certain amount of oft-lambasted tech debt wouldn't be a problem. But if only a few people take it, then their teams are more likely to fall behind and be noticed. Thus, nobody takes it for fear of being the one who caused their project to miss a deadline. 

## The Solution
The solution, in my mind, is no different from any other prisoner's dilemma: common knowledge. Everyone talks about Tinker Time, but nobody takes it. But what if we could encourage not just individuals, but _groups_ of people to take it? Individuals would certainly feel less of the spotlight effect if they could point to a few others who were also working on learning about the same technology, or working on the same project as them. Knowledge gained in a vacuum is rarely useful, but I've noticed knowledge gained with peers is much more likely to grow and spread itself throughout the office. When concepts and projects are worked on by several, the transfer of knowledge becomes much more casual - much less formal than making a PowerPoint and having to summarize several days of work in 15 minutes, at the very least. 

This is all well and good, and for those whose end goal is more knowledge about a subject this might be enough. But there are still those who want to _do_ something: those who want to pay down some tech debt that's not in scope but would make life just a bit better, those who think that our current internal tooling is good but could use a few new features, those who think that we could immediately leverage a new technology to improve the developer experience... the list goes on, and from conversations with coworkers, this group seems to be the majority. Unlike a side project though, we can't always reach the desired end in a day or two a month. There needs to be a bit more order, more guidance around the collective efforts of the engineering team.
One idea that a few of us have kicked around is instituting __guilds__. "Guild" is probably not the best term to use but people love terms that are short and snappy so it'll probably stick. A guild could be likened to a task force - a group of people who come together to fulfill some specific purpose. Guilds aren't meant to be a major commitment, but a construct to help advance collective goals. Their structure would mirror that of our normal teams: a small number of developers and QA, guided by the requirements of the Product Owner. The only difference is, there is (probably) no Product Owner; that onus falls on the guild members and possibly the broader engineering team. Guilds have weekly meetings to discuss... whatever they want really. Those with grand plans may use the time for planning and updates; others may use it as a time to share best practices, or do code reviews, etc. The goal is to add structure without stifling creativity and curiosity. We want people to try new things and learn without fearing the social stigma, or the presentation, or producing a good-looking artifact, or anything else that might be holding them back.

## The Future
This is the theory, but we have not yet put it into practice. We have a few meetings with management in the coming weeks to discuss before we can start the actual implementation. I'll keep you posted though.